---
layout: post
title: "MATRIX (1999) / 1 hour recut"
category: recut
image: "/assets/previews/matrix-1h.jpg"
description: Check out a one-hour long reedit of the matrix movie and read about the process of its creation. Film editing practice blog.
---

<iframe class="embed" frameborder="0" src="https://mega.nz/embed/YjVlHZwL#GedJUp5HylSmVaAjaarS_MPCHsmNrxQLPnG3jE3tDjI" allowfullscreen ></iframe>

# 1. Disclaimer

**NOTE**: The re-edit of the movie is created purely for practice and personal use only. No commercial application of the material is intended or permitted. The copyright is fully recognized as owned by the owners of the original film material. The video is presented on this website solely to demonstrate the art of editing.

# 2. Goal

This particular edit aims to tell the same story as the original movie. This means that the meaning in **most** scenes remains the same. However, there are changes within the majority of the scenes, some scenes are reordered, and some are removed entirely.

The main goal of the recut was to try to remove as much runtime as possible, while also:

1. Preserve the main story being told
2. Maintain a working pacing
3. Try to make sense of most of the scenes
4. Get rid of as much shoe-leather as possible

# 3. Intro

**NOTE**: First, I acknowledge that the original film is a cult classic and a cultural phenomenon. It has amassed a legion of fans worldwide and inspired countless works of science fiction, art, and film. The movie's writers and directors created something magical that has garnered significant attention. Sitting here, 24 years later, without a deadline, speculating about alternative approaches seems presumptuous. I am not claiming superiority or greater experience over the movie's creators. I have no idea what I am doing anyway.

What I **CAN** do is take the film and play the game of *“what I would do if ever given such source material (plus no deadline, no budget limitations, no studio input, and having already seen the original movie itself)”*. This is exactly what I'm doing and nothing more. It's important to understand that it's **NOT** an attempt to make the particular film better, or to make a better film. It's merely a fantasy to see what would happen if I ever got to edit a movie like that.

# 4. Process

When watching a movie specifically for analysis, I try to pay attention to these elements:

- The order of scenes: How scenes follow each other, how plot setups are established and how they are resolved.


- Character contributions to the plot: How different characters add value and what their motivations are for existing.


- The "flow" within scenes: How tightly scenes deliver plot points, how smoothly they flow off the screen, and how much shoe-leather and padding is present in scenes.


- The “feel” of the dialogue: How natural dialogue delivery feels (NOT same as “realistic”) vs how forced it feels. How smooth the dialogue transitions are. What we see when someone is speaking and why.


- The overall sound of each scene. How clear and distinct different actions or dialogue lines can be heard. What feeling the sound adds, if any. Is there music and what purpose does it serve.

As I cut the film into separate scenes, I take notes about each scene according to these points: how it relates to other scenes, how it feels in isolation, what purpose the characters serve in it, how it sounds, etc.

# 5. Objectives

The next step is to compile a list of things I'd like to try changing in the film and why.

### 5.1. Padded run-time

The first noticeable thing upon rewatching the movie is how "padded" the runtime is. It might be only me, but it seems like every single scene takes as much time as possible, and then some. Shots that don't serve any apparent purpose are inserted. Long pans are used when a cut would work just as well. There are many shots that only serve for action continuity, even when it doesn't seem necessary. Character reactions sometimes feel awkwardly long because dialogue edits take more time than they could.

This might be understandable in a shorter film that requires additional timing, but in a movie that's over 130 minutes long, I believe there needs to be a compelling reason for every single minute of that runtime to exist.

Immediately, the idea arose to try and see if some things could be edited "tighter": removing certain shots, cutting out padding to make reactions snappier, eliminating duplicated action, and removing some shots that only serve for continuity when I feel the order of events might be clear without them.

### 5.2. Dead-end scenes

The next noticeable thing is how some scenes lead nowhere in the overall story.

- Agents insert a tracking device into Neo and you think, "Wow, that's a great setup. I wonder how this will serve as a Chekhov Gun later and perhaps become a major plot turning point in the movie." - But then the device is removed in literally the next scene with no consequences whatsoever and is never mentioned in the movie again. You watch it like (o_o) and realize the only purpose for the tracking device in the movie is because they didn't know how to exit the interrogation scene in a better way.


- Neo oversleeps, arrives late to work, and faces his boss who explains how their company operates. He tells Neo that he must choose to either arrive on time from this moment forward or find another job. The conflict is established, and drama is created. This is great stuff! However, both the job and the boss are never mentioned in the movie again. I understand the symbolism of the boss telling Neo he thinks that rules do not apply to him and that he must find another job, and Neo sort of does exactly that, but is it worth a whole minute of a monologue about a company that we never hear about again? It feels like there could be a more effective way to deliver that line within the story.


- Neo enters the car, and Switch asks him to lift his shirt. When questioned “why”, she reacts like a crazy person, essentially instructing him to either comply without question or leave. Neo decides to leave and attempts to exit the car. Trinity intervenes, urging him to trust them, and Neo just goes “okay then”, and lifts his shirt. This sequence not only requires characters to be mental, but it also serves as a pointless insert that doesn't alter the narrative or character development. They could have simply stated, “there might be a tracking device on you, we need to check”.

### 5.3. Over-explaining

One of the major contributors to the extended runtime is the movie's tendency to constantly over-explain itself, add bloated non-essential exposition, and sometimes duplicate the same ideas pointlessly.

- Oracle tells Neo not to worry about the vase. He asks, "Which vase?" and breaks the vase in the process. That's a cool scene in itself. But just as you get a chance to process what just happened, characters start discussing it and explicitly say, "Would you have broken it if I hadn't said anything?" Thanks for the ruined opportunity to figure it out on my own.


- First, we are shown a bunch of "Alice in Wonderland" hints and references, which is all cool. But then we get to Morpheus, and one of the first things he says is, "You are feeling a bit like Alice, tumbling down the rabbit hole.”


- The boss tells Neo he must choose to arrive at work on time or find another job. This is symbolic. Then, just two scenes later, Smith tells Neo he has two lives, and "only one of those lives has a future, and the other does not." This is the same exact thing, lazy symbolism.


- Neo and Morpheus exit the training simulations. Neo feels pain and sees blood. Morpheus says, "Your mind makes it real." It would be such a cool thing to allow viewers to arrive at conclusions after that, but Neo just says, "If you die in the Matrix, you also die in the real world." This is a great example of this dumb trend in the movie.


- Cypher in the restaurant with Smith. First half of the scene is just him expositioning how Matrix makes him feel artificial taste even tho he knows it’s not real. Out loud. That’s just dumb. Smith is probably sitting there, thinking: "wtf does it have to do with me?". Plus Cypher doesn’t mention how he will still be hungry in the real world, since he is not being artificial fed at the moment. Plus him meeting Smith in Matrix means someone on the ship would have to load him in and then monitor his activity.


- The entire scene where Mouse talks about food taste and acts as a virtual pimp is not only cringe-worthy, but also pointless. It's a fanfic that doesn't contribute to the story in any way. It would be better to leave it to the audience's imagination.


- Dozer had to explain exactly what they were eating - who really cares that it's a protein mix with multivitamins? How does it change the story? Apoc's single line about the "ol' bowl of snot" is worth a million explanations of what the authors meant exactly by that food.


- Smith's ten-minute monologue about the origins of the matrix is just terrible. Cool story, bro. I wish I could watch it happening as a part of the movie, instead of listening to a character telling me about it, even though it makes no difference to the story whatsoever. The entire movie could have been replaced with just "Agent Smith's Awesome Tales," where he tells us about a guy called Neo and how cool he is. We could have finished in about 30 minutes then, instead of wasting two hours.

My main objective with this idea was to see if I could eliminate some of the explaining and still have the story work. I also wanted to provide more freedom for the viewer to interpret things for themselves.

Not every single detail about every aspect of a story matters for a movie to be enjoyable. The core idea of the plot is foolish anyway; it's a fairytale. Attempting to incorporate extensive sci-fi world-building doesn't necessarily enhance it.

### 5.4. Non-essential characters

- Mouse. "Hi! Wow, you can fight! Are you horny? I sure am. OK, bye!" That's essentially the character's story. What's his purpose in the story? Simply to voice irrelevant things and then be killed in an illogical scene?


- Dozer. At least Mouse has some emotional impact as a character. Mouse is cringy, weird, and terrible. Dozer can be replaced with a footnote that explains the most boring and unimportant things. Dozer is more interesting as a character when he is off-screen because he was born in the real world and he makes moonshine. When he is on-screen, he talks about the contents of the food that no one cares about.

I understand they probably wanted a larger crew. But at what cost? Why Apoc works as a background character, while also barely contributing anything and then dying a stupid death? Maybe it's because he gets to be useful, and he gets to be cool, and he gets to be funny, and he gets to say “the ol’ bowl-o-snot”. It's just few seconds of each, but it adds up and creates some minimal emotion for him. Dozer just gets to make worried faces and say irrelevant things and then provide zero impact and die. At some point it's better to not have a named character at all, than t have them in such manner.

I got very curious to see if it would be possible to remove these characters and still maintain apparent continuity in their scenes. They contribute nothing of importance when they speak, so I knew there would be no problems with the plot.

# 6. Conclusion

When I started, I didn't have a specific length in mind. I was only testing, what could be eliminated while keeping the story working. As I kept removing more and more, around 75-minute run-time it became a goal for me to fit it in under one hour. Around 70 minutes it started being challenging. After the 65-minute mark I struggled and had to argue with myself about what else can be let go. At 61 minutes it became an actual problem and I had to rewatch the entire thing multiple times over to spot every tiny place where multiple seconds could be sacrificed. At that point, I truly felt that reducing the run-time futher does not necessarily makes the result so much better. I have not felt it at 70 minutes.

Indeed, it was a great exercise to limit myself to a specific time frame. It made me consider every single minute and forced me to make sacrifices. I know it's a valuable practice tool when writing a story or script, to sit down and force yourself to cut what you've created in half, and then cut it in half again. The difference in film editing is that you're figuring out how to tell a story with pre-existing material, so you can't add much to retell scenes differently. You're fortunate if you have more material than you need to make things work. In the case of a recut, you only have the pieces that someone else has already cut. You can't use a long take if there wasn't one in the original movie. So, you have to come up with hacks.

I initially considered transforming it into a short movie of 30 minutes or less. However, it soon became clear that, at least at my current skill level, this would be impossible without altering the narrative. The original story seems to have too many events to be condensed into less than an hour. While I still have ideas for shortening some sequences, this would inevitably change the plot. I plan to explore these ideas in a separate project.

My conclusion is that the main story in The Matrix can be comfortably told in about 70 minutes. I mostly regret not being able to include more scenes to justify Cypher's feelings for Trinity, so it doesn't seem so blunt when he tells her about it. Most of those scenes were either cut for time or because they didn't work outside of a larger context that wasn't worth it. I also regret not being able to provide more justification for Trinity's feelings for Neo, but that part is quite poorly done in the movie itself and comes across as forced anyway.

With the main story only taking 70 minutes, even if we add back some of the action and more indulgent scenes, it could be an 80-90 minute movie, instead of 135 minutes. By adding 20-30 minutes of actual meaningful content, and not just padding, we could also have seen:

- Neo actually uses his computer skills in a useful way, rather than being just a generic random character who becomes a superhero (perhaps incorporating some actual sci-fi, not just a fairytale).


- Perhaps we could see an additional five minutes of Neo and Trinity spending time together, establishing their feelings. Trinity could gradually realize that Neo might actually be the One, as prophesied. Instead of her automatically having feelings for him. Similar to how he becomes automatically amazing at everything. It's as if the movie was not only written for teens, but also BY teens.


- A bit more time could help make the agents' arrest of Neo make more sense. For example, instead of inserting a pointless tracker into him, they could just let him go, which would make him suspicious, and for a good reason, because they have placed surveillance over him and he has to work around it. Then it would at least make some sense to meet under a bridge after Neo goes through multiple stages of losing his tail. In the movie, they just call him on the landline and tell him to go there. They might as well just pick him up at home.

All of these examples would actually serve the story that is being told and the plot. Instead, we got about 20 minutes of something barely relevant and another 20 minutes of padding to lengthen scenes.

**Again, remember that all I do is sit on my arse and retrospectively speculate about something I know nothing about, without any budget or time constraints, discussing something that people actually went out and made. Producing a movie of such scope is an immense amount of work and a spectacular achievement. Producing a movie of such success is nothing short of a miracle. Whatever the authors have done, they have created something wonderful. The only purpose of my conclusions is to inform future ideas and decisions for myself and anyone else interested. Always respect the source material.**