---
layout: post
title: "MATRIX (1999) / 1 hour recut"
category: recut
image: "/assets/previews/matrix-1h.jpg"
description: Check out a one-hour long reedit of the matrix movie and read about the process of its creation. Film editing practice blog.
---

<iframe class="embed" frameborder="0" src="https://mega.nz/embed/YzFXmYRA#HZKGQgtosKMvs4q-BFL8yn5GlYkyd6VR57xsmTFmKf0" allowfullscreen ></iframe>

# 1. Disclaimer

**NOTE**: The re-edit of the movie is created purely for practicing purposes and personal use only. No commercial application of the material is intended or allowed. The copyright is fully recognised to be owned by the owners of the original film material. The video is only presented on this website for the purposes of demonstrating the art of editing. 

# 2. Goal

This particular edit seeks to tell the same story as in the original movie, which means in **most** of the scenes the meaning is left to be the same, but: there are changes within the majority of the scenes, some scenes are reordered, and some scenes are removed entirely.

The main goal of the recut was to try and remove as much runtime as possible, while also:

1. Preserve the main story being told
2. Maintain a working pacing
3. Try to make sense of most of the scenes
4. Get rid of as much shoe-leather as possible 

# 3. Intro

**NOTE**: first I recognise that the original film is truly a cult classic, a cultural phenomenon, has spawned armies of fans all across the planet, and inspired countless new works of science- and other -fiction and art and film and so on. Whatever the writers and directors of the movie have been doing - at that time they have produced something magical, or it would have never got as much attention as it has. I am in no right to be pretending to sit here on a high cinematographic horse 24 years later  with no deadline and speculate on whether some different approach would have made the movie better or not. And I am definitely not pretending to be better or smarter or more experienced than the creators of the movie at the time. I have no idea what I'm doing anyways.

What I **CAN** do is to take the film and play the game of _“what I would do, if ever given such source material (plus no deadline, no budget limitations, no studio input, and having already seen the original movie itself)”_. Which is exactly what I'm doing and nothing more. This is important to understand that it's **NOT** an attempt at making the particular film better, or to make a better film. It's merely a fantasy to see what would happen if I have ever got to edit a movie like that.

# 4. Process

When watching a movie specifically for analysis I am trying to pay attention to these elements:

- The order of scenes. How scenes follow each other. How plot setups are established and how they are resolved.


- Character contributions to the plot. How different characters add value and what is the motivation for them to exist.


- The “flow” within scenes. How tightly scenes deliver plot points, how smoothly it flows off the screen, how much shoe-leather and padding is there in scenes.


- The “feel” of the dialogue. How natural dialogue delivery feels (NOT same as “realistic”) vs how forced it feels. How smooth the dialogue transitions are. What we see when someone is speaking and why.


- The overall sound of each scene. How clear and distinct different actions or dialogue lines can be heard. What feeling the sound adds, if any. Is there music and what purpose does it serve.

As I am cutting film into separate scenes, I am taking notes about each scene according to these points: how it relates to other scenes, how it feels itself, what purpose characters serve in it, how it sounds, etc.

# 5. Objectives

The next step is to compile a list of things I'd like to try changing in the film and why.

### Padded run-time

The first noticeable thing over an analysing rewatch of the movie is how “padded” the runtime is. It might be only me, but it seemed like every single scene is taking as much time as possible and then some on top of it. Shots that don’t serve any apparent purpose are inserted. Long pans when a cut would work as well. Many shots that only serve for action continuity even when it doesn’t seem necessary. Character reactions feel awkwardly long sometimes because dialog edits take more time than they could.

This could be understandable in a shorter film that needs additional timing, but in a movie that is 130+ minutes long I think you need a really good reason for every single minute of that runtime to exist.

Immediately the idea came up to try and see if some of the things can be edited “tighter”: removing some of the shots, cutting out some padding to make reactions snappier, cutting out some duplicated action, removing some shots that serve for continuity only in cases when I feel the order of events might be clear without it.

### Dead-end scenes

The next big noticeable thing is how some scenes just lead to nowhere in the overall story.

- Agents put a tracking device into Neo and you think: “boy, that’s a good setup, I wonder how this will probably serve as a Chekhov Gun later and will maybe become a major plot turning point somewhere down the movie.” - And then the device gets removed in literally the next scene with no consequences whatsoever and is never mentioned in the movie again. You watch it like (o_o) and realise the only purpose for the tracking device to exist in the movie is because they didn’t know how to exit the interrogation scene in a better way.


- Neo oversleeps, gets late to work, and is facing his boss who is telling him how their company functions and how Neo must choose to get to work in time right since this moment or choose to get himself another job. Conflict is getting established. Drama is being created. This is great stuff! And then both the work and the boss are never mentioned in the movie ever again. I get the symbolism of the boss telling Neo he must choose to find himself another job and Neo sorta does exactly that, but is it worth a whole minute of a monologue about a company that we never hear about ever again? Feels like there could be a more effective way to deliver that one line within the story.


- Neo gets in the car and Switch tells him to pull up his shirt. When asked “why”, she acts like a crazy person and tells him basically to either obey her and ask no questions or get out, Neo says he is out and tries to exit the car, Trinity stops him and just says to trust them, and then Neo just says “ok then”, sits back and pulls the shirt right up. Not only this is completely mental behaviour, but also this is a pointless insert that changes nothing and gets all characters right back at the same exact point they were at before. They could have just said “there might be a tracking device on you, we need to check”.

### Over-explaining

One of the big contributors to the padded runtime is the tendency of the movie to constantly over-explain itself, add bloated non-essential exposition, and sometime duplicate the same ideas pointlessly.

- Oracle tells Neo not to worry about the vase, he asks which vase and breaks the vase in the process. That’s a cool scene in itself, but just as you get a chance to process what just happened, characters start discussing it and explicitly say: “would you have broken it if I haven't said anything?” Thanks for the ruined opportunity to figure it out on my own.


- First we are shown a bunch of “Alice in wonderland” hints and references and it’s all cool, but then we get to Morpheus and one of the first things he says is: “You are feeling a bit like Alice, tumbling down a rabbit hole.”


- Boss tells Neo he has to choose to come to work in time or find himself another job. Symbolic. Then like two scenes later Smith tells Neo he has two lives and “only one of those lives has a future, and the other does not”. That’s just same exact thing, lazy symbolism.


- Neo and Morpheus exit training simulations. Neo feels pain and sees blood, Morpheus says “Your mind makes it real”. That would be such a cool thing to let viewers to arrive at the conclusions after that, but Neo just says “If you die in Matrix - you also die in real world”. That is a great example of this dumb trend in the movie.


- Cypher in the restaurant with Smith. First half of the scene is just him expositioning how Matrix makes him feel artificial taste even tho he knows it’s not real. Out loud. That’s just dumb. Smith is probably sitting there, thinking: "wtf does it have to do with me?". Plus Cypher doesn’t mention how he will still be hungry in the real world, since he is not being artificial fed at the moment. Plus him meeting Smith in Matrix means someone on the ship would have to load him in and then monitor his activity.


- The entire scene with Mouse talking about food taste and being virtual pimp. Not only cringy, but also it’s a pointless fanfic that doesn’t help the story in any way. Just leave it for the audience to play with their own imagination later.


- Dozer had to have his part explaining what is that exactly they are eating - who really cares that it’s a protein mix with multivitamins? What does it change for the story? The single line from Apoc about the “ol’ bowl of snot” worth a million explanations of what the authors meant exactly with that food.


- The ten-minute monologues from Smith about the origins of matrix is just terrible. Cool story, bro. Wish I could watch it happening as a part of the movie, instead of listening to a character telling me about it, even tho it makes no difference for the story whatsoever anyway. Could have replaced the entire movie with just “Agent Smith Awesome Tales” where he is telling us about a guy called Neo and how cool he is. We could get done in like 30 minutes then, instead of wasting two hours.

So my main idea with this objective were to see if I could get rid of some of this explaining and have the story still work. And also achieve some more freedom for the viewer to figure out things for themselves.

By far not every single detail about every single stupid thing in a story matters for a movie to be enjoyable. The core idea about the plot is super dumb anyways, it’s a fairytale, and trying to do all this science-fiction world-building does not help in any way.

### Non-essential characters

- Mouse. “Hi! Wow, you can fight! Are you horny? I sure am. OK, bye!” That's essentially the story of the character. What is the need for him to be in the story? Just to say out loud things that don't matter and then be killed in an illogical scene.
- Dozer. At least Mouse has some emotional impact as a character. Mouse is cringy and weird and terrible. Dozer can be replaced with a footnote that explains the most boring and unimportant things. Dozer is more interesting as a character when he is off screen, because he was born in the real world and he makes moonshine. When he is on screen he talks about the contents of the food that no one cares about.

I get it that they probably wanted for the crew to be larger. But at what cost? Why Apoc works as a background character while also barely having anything to do in the movie and dying a stupid death? Maybe it's because he gets to be useful, and he gets to be cool, and he gets to be funny, and he gets to say “the ol’ bowl-o-snot”. It's just few seconds of each, but it adds up and makes me feel at least some minimal emotion for him. Dozer just gets to make worried faces and say the most dumb pointless stuff and then do zero impact and die. At some point it's better to not have a named character at all, than to have them like that.

I got very curious to see if it would be possible to get rid of these characters and still have seeming continuity around their scenes. They contribute nothing of importance when they speak so I knew there will be no problems with the plot.

# Conclusion

When starting, I didn't have any specific length in mind. I was only trying out, what I could get rid of and keep the story working. As I kept removing more and more, around 75-minute run-time it became a goal for me to fit it in under one hour. Around 70 minutes it started being actually hard. After the 65-minute mark I struggled and had to have arguments with myself about what else can be let go. At 61 minutes it became the actual problem and I had to rewatch the entire thing multiple times over to spot every tiny place where multiple seconds could be sacrificed. At that point I have felt for real that removing the run-time does not necessarily makes the result so much better. I have not felt it at 70 minutes.

For sure it was a great exercise to limit myself with the specific time limit. It made me carefully consider every single minute being shown and forced me to sacrifice some things. I know it's a very good practicing tool when writing a story or a script, to sit down and force yourself to cut what you have created in half, and then cut it in half again. The difference in case of film editing is that you are figuring out how to tell a story with pre-existing material, so you can't add much of anything new to retell scenes differently. You are lucky if you have got more material than you need to make things work. And in case of a recut you only have the pieces that someone else already cut before. You can't use a long take if there hasn't been one in the original movie. So you have to come up with hacks.

I had a potential idea of making it into a short movie of 30 minutes or less, but then it became apparent that it is impossible (at least for me at current level) to do this without changing the story that is being told. There just seems to be too many events of the actual good story for it to be told in less than at least an hour. I still have ideas how to use some of the sequences in a much shorter way, but it would change the plot. I will be working on it as a separate project.

My conclusion is that the main story in the Matrix can be quite comfortably told in about 70 minutes. I mostly regretted not being able to put in more scenes to justify Cypher feelings for Trinity, so it doesn't come out that blant when he tells her about it. Most of those scenes were either cut for time or because they didn't work outside of a larger context that wasn't worth it. And also not being able to have more justification about Trinity feelings for Neo, but that part is quite badly done in the movie itself and comes out forced anyway.

With the main story only taking 70 minutes, even if we add back some of the action and more indulgence scenes it could be an 80-90 minutes movie, instead of 135 minutes. Adding 20-30 minutes or actual meaningful content to it, and not just padding, we could as well have got to see:

- Neo actually using his computer skills in some useful way and not being just a generic random guy character that gets to be a superhero (maybe getting some actual sci-fi and not a fairytale)
- Maybe see just like five additional minutes of Neo and Trinity spending time together and establishing their feelings, with Trinity like realizing over time that Neo must actually be the One, as promised. Instead of just showing her automatically having feelings for him, sorta in the same manner how he just gets to be automatically amazing at everything. It's like the movie were not only written for teens , but also BY teens.
- A bit more time could help make the agents arresting Neo make some actual sense. For example, instead of putting a pointless tracker into him they could just let him go , which makes him suspicious, and for a good reason, because they have placed surveillance over him and he has to work around it. Then it would at least make some sense to meet under a bridge after Neo goes through multiple stages of loosing tail. In the movie they just call him on the landline and tell him to go there. Could as well just pick him up at home.

All of these examples would actually service the story that is being told and and the plot. Instead we got like 20 minutes of something barely relevant and another 20 minutes of just padding to make scenes longer.

**And again, remember that all I do is sit on my arse and retrospectively speculate on something I have no idea about, while having no budget or time limits, discussing something that people actually went out and made. Producing a movie of such scope is an immense amount of work and a spectacular achievement. Producing a movie of such success is just a pure miracle. Whatever the authors have been doing they have made their own wonderful thing. The only point of my conclusions is to inform future ideas and decisions for myself and anyone else interested. Always respect the source material.**